The Project Gutenberg eBook of The urine dance of the Zuni Indians of
New Mexico, by John G. Bourke

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The urine dance of the Zuni Indians of New Mexico

Author: John G. Bourke

Compiler: P. H. Sheridan

Release Date: July 13, 2022 [eBook #68519]

Language: English

Produced by: Charlene Taylor, Donald Cummings and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The
             Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE URINE DANCE OF THE ZUNI
INDIANS OF NEW MEXICO ***





                            THE URINE DANCE

                                OF THE

                      ZUNI INDIANS OF NEW MEXICO




                        NOT FOR GENERAL PERUSAL

                            THE URINE DANCE
                                OF THE
                      ZUNI INDIANS OF NEW MEXICO

                                  BY

                        CAPTAIN JOHN G. BOURKE
                       THIRD CAVALRY, U. S. ARMY

             FROM THE ETHNOLOGICAL NOTES COLLECTED BY HIM

                        UNDER THE DIRECTION OF

             LIEUTENANT GENERAL P. H. SHERIDAN, U. S. ARMY

                               IN 1881.

                           PRIVATELY PRINTED
                                 1920




                     THE URINE DANCE OF THE ZUNIS
                                  by
          JOHN G. BOURKE, Captain, Third Cavalry, U. S. Army


On the evening of November 17, 1881, during my stay in the village of
Zuni, New Mexico, the _Nehue-Cue_, one of secret orders of the Zunis,
sent word to Mr. F. Cushing (whose guest I was) that they would do
us the unusual honor of coming to our house to give us one of their
characteristic dances, which, Cushing said, was unprecedented.

The squaws of the Governor’s family put the long “living room” to
rights, sweeping the floor and sprinkling it with water to lay the
dust. Soon after dark the dancers entered; they were twelve in number,
two being boys. The center men were naked with the exception of black
breech-clouts of archaic style. The hair was worn naturally with a
bunch of wild turkey feathers tied in front, and one of corn-husks
over each ear. White bands were painted across the face at eyes and
mouth. Each wore a collar or neckcloth of black woolen stuff. Broad
white bands, one inch wide, were painted around the body at the navel,
around the arms, the legs at mid-thighs and knees. Tortoise-shell
rattles hung from the right knee. Blue woolen footless leggins were
worn with low-cut moccasins, and in the right hand each waved a wand
made of an ear of corn, trimmed with the plumage of the wild turkey and
macaw. The others were arrayed in old cast-off American army clothing,
and all wore white cotton night-caps, with corn-husks twisted into
the hair at top of head and ears. Several wore, in addition to the
tortoise-shell rattles, strings of brass sleigh-bells at knees. One was
more grotesquely attired than the rest in a long India-rubber gossamer
“over all” and a pair of goggles, painted white, over his eyes. His
general “get-up” was a spirited take-off upon a Mexican priest. Another
was a very good counterfeit of a young woman.

To the accompaniment of an oblong drum, and of the rattles and bells
spoken of, they shuffled into the long room, crammed with spectators
of both sexes, and of all sizes and ages. Their song was apparently
a ludicrous reference to everything and everybody in sight, Cushing,
Mendeleff, and myself receiving special attention, to the uncontrolled
merriment of the red-skinned listeners. I had taken my station at one
side of the room, seated upon the banquette, and having in front of me
a rude bench or table upon which was a small coal-oil lamp. I suppose
that in the halo diffused by the feeble light and in my “stained-glass
attitude” I must have borne some resemblance to the pictures of saints
hanging upon the walls of old Mexican churches; to such a fancied
resemblance I at least attribute the performance which followed.

The dancers suddenly wheeled into line, threw themselves on their knees
before my table, and with extravagant beatings of breast began an
outlandish but faithful mockery of a Mexican Catholic congregation at
vespers. One bawled out a parody upon the Pater Noster, another mumbled
along in the manner of an old man reciting the rosary, while the fellow
with the India-rubber coat jumped up and began a passionate exhortation
or sermon, which for mimetic fidelity was inimitable. This kept the
audience laughing with sore sides for some moments, until at a signal
from the leader the dancers suddenly countermarched out of the room, in
single file, as they had entered.

An interlude followed of ten minutes, during which the dusty floor
was sprinkled by men who spat water forcibly from their mouths. The
_Nehue-Cue_ re-entered; this time two of their number were stark
naked. Their singing was very peculiar and sounded like a chorus of
chimney-sweeps, and their dance became a stiff-legged jump, with heels
kept twelve inches apart. After they had ambled around the room two
or three times, Cushing announced in the Zuni language that a “feast”
was ready for them, at which they loudly roared their approbation and
advanced to strike hands with the munificent “Americanos,” addressing
us in a funny gibberish of broken Spanish, English, and Zuni. They then
squatted upon the ground and consumed with zest large “ollas” full of
tea, and dishes of hard tack and sugar. As they were about finishing
this a squaw entered, carrying an “olla” of urine, of which the filthy
brutes drank heartily.

I refused to believe the evidence of my senses, and asked Cushing if
that were really human urine. “Why, certainly,” replied he, “and here
comes more of it.” This time, it was a large tin pail-full, not less
than two gallons. I was standing by the squaw as she offered this
strange and abominable refreshment. She made a motion with her hand to
indicate to me that it was urine, and one of the old men repeated the
Spanish word _mear_ (to urinate), while my sense of smell demonstrated
the truth of their statements.

The dancers swallowed great draughts, smacked their lips, and, amid the
roaring merriment of the spectators, remarked that it was very, very
good. The clowns were now upon their mettle, each trying to surpass his
neighbors in feats of nastiness. One swallowed a fragment of corn-husk,
saying he thought it very good and better than bread; his _vis-à-vis_
attempted to chew and gulp down a piece of filthy rag. Another
expressed regret that the dance had not been held out of doors, in one
of the plazas; there they could show what they could do. There they
always made it a point of honor to eat the excrement of men and dogs.

For my own part I felt satisfied with the omission, particularly as the
room, stuffed with one hundred Zunis, had become so foul and filthy as
to be almost unbearable. The dance, as good luck would have it, did not
last many minutes, and we soon had a chance to run into the refreshing
night air.

To this outline description of a disgusting rite I have little to add.
The Zunis, in explanation, stated that the _Nehue-Cue_ were a Medicine
Order which held these dances from time to time to inure the stomachs
of members to any kind of food, no matter how revolting. This statement
may seem plausible enough when we understand that religion and medicine
among primitive races are almost always one and the same thing, or,
at least, so closely intertwined that it is a matter of difficulty to
decide where one begins and the other ends.

Religion in its dramatic ceremonial preserves, to some extent, the
history of the particular race in which it dwells. Among nations of
high development, miracles, moralities, and passion plays have taught,
down to our own day, in object lessons, the sacred history in which
the spectators believed. Some analogous purpose may have been held
in view by the first organizers of the urine dance. In their early
history, the Zunis and other Pueblos suffered from constant warfare
with savage antagonists and with each other. From the position of their
villages, long sieges must of necessity have been sustained, in which
sieges famine and disease, no doubt, were the allies counted upon by
the investing forces. We may have in this abominable dance a tradition
of the extremity to which the Zunis of the long ago were reduced at
some unknown period. A similar catastrophe in the history of the Jews
is intimated in II Kings, xviii, 27: “But Rab-shakeh said unto them:
hath my master sent me to thy master, and to thee to speak these words?
hath he not sent me to the men which sit on the wall, that they may
_eat their own dung and drink their own piss with you_?” In the course
of my studies, I came across a reference to a very similar dance,
occurring among one of the fanatical sects of the Arabian Bedouins, but
the journal in which it was recorded, the _London Lancet_, I think, was
unfortunately mislaid.

As illustrative of the tenacity with which such vile ceremonial, once
adopted by a sect, will adhere to it and become ingrafted upon its
life, long after the motives which have suggested or commended it
have vanished in oblivion, let me quote a few lines from Max Muller’s
“Chips from a German Workshop,” “Essay upon the Parsees,” pp. 163, 164,
Scribner’s edition, 1869:

“The _Nirang_ is the urine of cow, ox, or she-goat, and the rubbing
of it over the face and hands is the second thing a Parsee does after
getting out of bed. Either before applying the _Nirang_ to the face
and hands, or while it remains on the hands after being applied, he
should not touch anything directly with his hands; but, in order to
wash out the _Nirang_, he either asks somebody else to pour water on
his hands, or resorts to the device of taking hold of the pot through
the intervention of a piece of cloth, such as a handkerchief, or his
_sudra_, _i. e._, his blouse. He first pours water on his hand, then
takes the pot in that hand and washes his other hand, face, and feet.”
(Quoting from _Dadabhai-Nadrosi’s_ Description of the Parsees.)

Continuing, Max Muller says: “Strange as this process of purification
may appear, it becomes perfectly disgusting when we are told that
women, after childbirth, have not only to undergo this sacred ablution,
but actually to drink a little of the _Nirang_, and that the same
rite is imposed on children at the time of their investiture with the
_Sudra_ and _Koshti_, the badges of the Zoroastrian faith.”


     _One hundred copies printed strictly for private circulation_


                   *       *       *       *       *




 Transcriber’s Note:

 ――Text in italics is enclosed by underscores (_italics_).

 ――Archaic and variable spelling has been preserved.


*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE URINE DANCE OF THE ZUNI
INDIANS OF NEW MEXICO ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
